CrateDB Edge monitoring tutorial (#92)
crate/cloud-getting-started: docs/edge/monitoring.rst

.. _edge-monitoring:

Monitor CrateDB Edge
====================

> This tutorial introduces ways to set up monitoring of your CrateDB Edge cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial introduces a way to set up monitoring of your CrateDB Edge cluster.
```

there are others

> Visualization tool `Grafana`_ is used together with `Prometheus`_ and `Loki`_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The visualization tool `Grafana`_ is used together with `Prometheus`_ and `Loki`_
```

to monitor the cluster performance and browse logs, respectively.

.. rubric:: Table of contents

.. contents::
   :local:

.. _edge-monitoring-prereqs:

Prerequisites
-------------

> - The CrateDB Edge installation script requires Helm to be present in the system.

Reviewer: Does it matter if Helm 2 or 3?

Author: Not sure. @SStorm ?

Author: 3. Will edit

- For a deployment with Grafana, Loki, and Prometheus, we recommend at

>   least 5 CPUs and 5 GiB of memory per node for acceptable performance.

Reviewer: 5 CPUs seems to be a lot for just "monitoring"

Author: In GKE I had issues deploying with less. By default, we recommend 3 CPUs afaik so I found it reasonable.

.. _edge-monitoring-deployment:

Cluster Deployment
------------------

Deployment steps will depend on your :ref:`cloud provider <edge-providers>`,
or on your local environment, if you choose the :ref:`self-hosted
<edge-self-hosted>` variant of CrateDB Edge.

.. _edge-monitoring-grafana-install:

> Grafana Install

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install Grafana and Loki
```

And should it really be "install" afaik containers are deployed?

---------------

The first important step comes after the successful installation of CrateDB into your
chosen system. Right after you get the following console prompt:

.. code-block:: console

  ✓ Region is connected to CrateDB Cloud.
  ✓ Successfully validated installation

> This means that base installation is done. You will now be asked if you want to

Reviewer: Should maybe be clarified, that the install script can also be run again to get to those steps, in case one missed them the first time.

username is ``admin`` and the password can be retrieved with the following
command:

.. code-block:: console
  
  kubectl get secret --namespace crate-loki crate-grafana -o jsonpath="{.data.admin-password}" | base64 --decode ; echo

You will get a response with a password:

.. code-block:: console

  rpz654Q2k8D5vgcvvrRgQMZAC2gKxZJH4oQf09fB

.. _edge-monitoring-port-forwarding:

Port-forwarding to get the Grafana URL
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

To get the URL of your Grafana UI, you need to issue the following commands:

.. code-block:: console

  export POD_NAME=$(kubectl get pods --namespace crate-loki -l "app.kubernetes.io/name=grafana,app.kubernetes.io/instance=crate-grafana" -o jsonpath="{.items[0].metadata.name}")
  
  kubectl --namespace crate-loki port-forward $POD_NAME 3000

This will forward your running Grafana instance to port ``3000``. You can then
view it on that port. For this tutorial, we used Google Cloud Engine. After 
issuing the command, we use the "Web preview" to see Grafana UI on port 3000.

.. image:: ../_assets/img/edge-monitoring-forwarding.png
   :alt: Google Cloud web preview

.. NOTE::

> 

Reviewer 2: Do you think we need this section? Port usage does not depend on your cloud provider - merely on what you've currently got running. Maybe not worth elaborating on this section, as we don't cover other possible error scenarios elsewhere...

Author: I'd be more than happy to get rid of it honestly, it's way too long for a note, looks terrible. The thing is, I think it's good info. I was doing all testing on GKE. I tried multiple CPU tiers, multiple Kubernetes versions. Sometimes the `:3000` was free, sometimes occupied in a fresh GKE cluster. Not sure what's going on there. Should I just remove it?

Author: Talked with Roman too, he agrees with you. Will edit.

    Depending on your cloud provider, it is possible that port 3000 will
    already be occupied in your system. If that's the case, you will see
    following response:

    .. code-block:: console

      Unable to listen on port 3000: Listeners failed to create with the following errors: 
      [unable to create listener: Error listen tcp4 127.0.0.1:3000: bind: address already in use unable to create listener: 
      Error listen tcp6 [::1]:3000: bind: cannot assign requested address]
      error: unable to listen on any of the requested ports: [{3000 3000}

    When that happens, inspect occupied ports by issuing:

    .. code-block:: console

      sudo netstat -tulpn | grep LISTEN

    You may get a response like:

    .. code-block:: console

      tcp  2  0  127.0.0.1:3000  0.0.0.0:*  LISTEN  667/kubectl

    If it's a service you don't currently need, kill the process with:

    .. code-block:: console

      kill -9 667

    After that, reissue the port-forwarding commands.

.. _edge-monitoring-prometheus-datasource:

Adding the Prometheus data source
---------------------------------

At this point, you should be able to access the Grafana UI. After logging in, it

> is necessary to add a new data source Prometheus. To add a data source, choose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is necessary to add Prometheus as a data source, by navigating to
```

To monitor cluster performance, you need to add another data source -
Prometheus. Click the "Add data source" button in the
top right to add a new data source. Choose "Prometheus" when shown the list of options. You will be
brought to the data source configuration page.

.. image:: ../_assets/img/edge-monitoring-prometheus-datasource.png
   :alt: Grafana Prometheus data source

The only field that you need to fill out is "URL". The URL for Prometheus is
always:

.. code-block:: console

  http://cluster-monitoring-prometheus.monitoring.svc.cluster.local:9090

After that, click "Save & test" at the bottom of the page. You should get a
response "Data source is working"

.. _edge-monitoring-importing-dashboards:

Importing the dashboards
------------------------

You can import our example dashboards now that you have the necessary data sources. To import the dashboards click on ``Dashboards -> Manage`` in the
menu on the left. Then click "Import" in the top right.

Both of these ``.json`` files need to be imported:

- `Cluster performance dashboard`_
- `Logs monitoring dashboard`_

.. _edge-monitoring-cluster-dashboard:

Cluster monitoring dashboard
----------------------------

> This dashboard utilizes metrics provided by Prometheus. It monitors following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This dashboard utilizes metrics provided by Prometheus. It monitors the following
```
